Digital index and vision page (#172)
QuEraComputing/bloqade: docs/quick_start/circuits/index.md

# Digital Quantum Computing with circuits

This section provides the quick start guide for programming quantum executions represented by circuits using Bloqade. Circuits are a general-purpose and powerful way of representing arbitrary computations. For a few examples please refer to our [examples](digital/index.md).

## Open Quantum Assembly Language (QASM2) and beyond

> We have chosen to closely mirror the semantics of the Open Quantum Assembly Language (QASM2) in bloqade.circuits. The QASM2 dialect is a simple quantum assembly language that allows you to write quantum circuits in a human-readable format. However, one should note that QASM2 is a very restricted language and does not support all the features of a high-level language.

Reviewer: I would suggest we don't use "we have chosen to closely mirror the semantics of QASM2" because we are actually moving away from extend qasm2 and to our structural gate later.

Reviewer 2: I can modify this a bit. I'm gonna merge this branch today so submit a PR to change it directly if there is anything you would like to revise later.

```

While the syntax is similar to Python, the `qasm2.extended` decorator actually compiles the `qft` function

> into lower-level intermediate representation (IR) code that can be later interpreted, analyzed, or executed on quantum hardware. Observe that this function cannot immediately compile down to QASM as it takes variable inputs, and is called recursively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
into lower-level intermediate representation (IR) code that can be later interpreted, analyzed, or executed on quantum hardware. Observe that this function cannot immediately compile down to QASM as it takes parametrized inputs, and is called recursively.
```

![QFT QASM2](qft-qasm2.png)

## Understanding the compilation process

The compilation process is divided into several stages:

1. **Lowering**: the decorator `qasm2.extended` takes the Python Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) and lowers it into Kirin IR in the Static Single Assignment (SSA) form.
2. **Interpretation**: when invoking the PyQrack backend, the IR code is interpreted via Kirin's IR interpreter (missing link) with the PyQrack runtime backend.
3. **Target code generation**: when emitting QASM2 code:
   1. The IR code gets aggressively inlined and all constant expressions are evaluated.
   2. All loops and control flow are unrolled.
   3. All compatible Python expressions (e.g `sin`, arithmetics) are translated into QASM2 expression.
   4. The QASM2 code is emitted as QASM2 AST for pretty printing.

> ### Incremental compiling
> 
> As well as writing circuit executions, you can also incrementally transform and compile that circuit. For example, you may want to lower arbitrary single qubit unitaries into hardware-specific unitaries, as is done in [this example](quick_start/circuits/compiler_passes/native_gate_rewrite.md). For more details on the kinds of circuit-level compiler passes and how to write your own, see [here](quick_start/circuits/compiler_passes/index.md)

Reviewer 2: incremental compilation means reusing existing compile results and only conmpile the part changed so could cause some confusion here. 
```suggestion
### Progressive compilation

As well as writing circuit executions, you can also progressively transform and compile that circuit. For example, you may want to lower arbitrary single qubit unitaries into hardware-specific unitaries, as is done in [this example](quick_start/circuits/compiler_passes/native_gate_rewrite.md). For more details on the kinds of circuit-level compiler passes and how to write your own, see [here](quick_start/circuits/compiler_passes/index.md)
```

## Dialect groups

> Bloqade provides a set of [dialects (missing link)]() for QASM2 and our custom extensions to model parallel gates in neutral atom architectures. The basic QASM2 functionality can be enabled via

Reviewer 3: Need some kind of canonical definition for dialect we can link to, don't know if it's floating around on some ACM paper or if Wikipedia has the definition, I can't seem to find it with a cursory google search.

Reviewer 2: just link to Kirin maybe?
